Which has greater appeal
—an effective counselor or a loving shepherd?
If you’re to be effective,
brothers and sisters,
in strengthening the organization
and building up the brotherhood,
it’s a good subject to consider.
And it includes you sisters too.
A counselor can be defined
as one who gives advice.
Now, the world has a lot of counselors.
They’ve got marriage counselors
and financial counselors
and bereavement counselors
and all kinds of counselors.
And you’ll find that their counsel varies
according to their experience and education.
Ahithophel
is a Biblical example of a counselor,
and the Bible says what he advised
was “considered as the word of the true God.”
Today, a person might feel
that he’s a good counselor,
and he may freely offer advice,
some of which
may or may not be accepted.
Maybe a solution-oriented husband
counsels his emotionally distraught wife
to just quit worrying.
Or a well-versed elder
quickly reads a Bible text,
and he advises
an extremely anxiety-filled publisher
to just get over it.
How effective is such counsel?
There’s a saying,
People don’t care how much you know
until they know how much you care.
Counsel is more effective
when the counselor is also a shepherd.
A shepherd is one
who comforts, nourishes, listens,
and does not ignore
the emotional needs of the distraught one.
Jehovah gives counsel, or advice,
but he always does more.
You see, he also shepherds.
When he counsels,
he tends to the person’s emotional needs
and he provides the needed follow-up.
Consider how he dealt
with an emotionally depressed prophet
by the name of Elijah.
I’m turning to 1 Kings 19,
and we’re going to consider just briefly
the interaction he had with Elijah.
And you will recall
that he was driven by fear.
Elijah was driven by fear of Jezebel.
Elijah fled southward
for 95 miles (150 km) to Beer-sheba,
and then he walked for about another
200 miles (320 km) to Mount Horeb.
But now notice in verse 5, it says:
“Then he [that is, Elijah]
“lay down and fell asleep
under the broom tree.
“But suddenly an angel
touched him and said to him:
“‘Get up and eat.’
“When he looked, there at his head
was a round loaf on heated stones
“and a jug of water.
“He ate and drank and lay down again.
“Later the angel of Jehovah
came back a second time
“and touched him and said:
“‘Get up and eat,
for the journey will be too much for you.’
“So he got up and ate and drank,
“and in the strength of that nourishment
“he went on for 40 days and 40 nights
until he reached Horeb,
the mountain of the true God.”
You notice,
the angel awakened Elijah;
ministered to him;
and Elijah went back to sleep,
like depressed ones often do.
Maybe the angel waited all night
and then he touched Elijah again
and then gave him more nourishment
—nourishment that would take him
40 days and 40 nights
on his journey to Mount Horeb.
Now, here’s a question
you have to ask yourself:
Do you think that that angel agreed
with the way Elijah was acting?
Do you think the angel
might have wanted to give a little counsel
and tell Elijah:
“Look, Elijah, just get over it.
Just trust God
and get back to your assignment”?
But he didn’t.
Do you think Jehovah
knew how Elijah was thinking?
Do you think he agreed with it?
No, definitely not.
See, a counselor may have handled it one way,
but Jehovah
—“the God of all comfort”—
would first address Elijah’s emotional needs.
So when Elijah finally entered
the cave at Mount Horeb,
do you remember what Jehovah did?
In a calm, low, gentle voice,
he said: ‘Eijah, what is your business here?’
And that was a warm invitation
for Elijah to express himself.
‘Just talk to me,’ you see.
And so Elijah did.
Look in verse 10,
and see what it was that Elijah said.
He said: “I have been absolutely zealous
for Jehovah the God of armies;
for the people of Israel
have forsaken your covenant.”
So Elijah felt like his work was in vain.
And then he said: “I’m the only one left.”
Elijah felt alone.
And he said: “They are seeking
to take [me away, take] my life away.”
So Elijah was also afraid.
Well, Jehovah heard what he said,
and he addressed all of Elijah’s concerns.
And then afterward,
he gave Elijah the encouragement
that would allow him
to continue on in Jehovah’s service
with boldness.
So, what can we learn
from this brief experience?
Well, we learned that Jehovah
validated the man’s emotions
without agreeing with his thinking.
And we also learned
that it’s often not necessary
to offer a quick solution.
Simply allowing a person
to express themselves
without feeling judged
can bring tremendous relief.
In fact, friends,
being heard is so close to being loved
that for the average person,
it’s indistinguishable.
Like Jehovah, we’ll be more effective
if we’re patient shepherds that listen
and give thoughtful consideration
to the feelings of those
that we’re seeking to help.
So here are four takeaway points, OK?
Number one:
Be a listener, not a lecturer.
Show empathy.
And remember,
empathy is seeing with the eyes of another,
hearing with the ears of another,
and feeling with the heart of another.
It’s easy, friends, for imperfect humans
to take themselves too seriously,
especially when they’re given
a position of responsibility.
So at times
it may even be best to refrain
from offering counsel too soon
because that creates an air of superiority.
Conversely, a willingness to hear
even “wild talk” from another
will reveal the depth of our own humility.
Point number two:
Validate people’s emotions,
and don’t just dismiss them.
Feelings are real,
so know the difference between
validating and invalidating statements.
“I can see why you would feel that way.
That must be really hard.”
You see, when we listen with empathy,
what we’re really saying is:
“You matter to me.
You’re important, and I care how you feel.”
Additionally,
when you validate the other person,
they become significantly more likely
to listen to advice or counsel later.
Remember, there is a difference between—
And by the way, let me just say this:
Counsel is not necessarily good
just because it’s accurate.
Frankly, how you give it
and when you give it is important.
So try to remember that.
Just because it’s accurate,
doesn’t make it good.
And there’s a difference too between
validating and devastating.
“You know, you’re too sensitive.”
“What’s the big deal?”
“I don’t want to hear it.”
“I don’t have time for this.”
“You need to work on your spirituality.”
Now, although we may not mean it,
this can translate into:
“You’re not important.
“Your feelings aren’t important.
And frankly, I don’t really care.”
Point number three:
Acknowledge a vulnerability.
Sharing personal thoughts
and emotions can be difficult,
uncomfortable, and even scary.
But I think that we’re encouraged
to develop fellow feeling.
And finally, point number four:
Offering counsel is entirely optional.
How many of us, brothers,
have been on a shepherding call,
and we’ve said virtually nothing?
And the publisher, the brother or sister,
afterward says:
“You know what?
That was the best
shepherding call I ever had.”
So, what some may need
is not some solution for the problem
but simply to talk to a good listener
—someone who will not tell them
how they’re supposed to feel,
but will listen without being judgmental.
The saying is, friends, Time is life.
If we won’t give a brother our time,
do you really think
we would give our life for him?
So when we ‘show favor to the lowly one’
by giving him time and attention,
we are, in fact, “lending to Jehovah.”
And the Bible says
that “he will repay” us in our time of need.
So weave counsel and shepherding together,
and you’ll be treasured by all those
around you and, most of all,
by Jehovah God and Jesus Christ.